The Gulf of Khambhat debate from 2001 to 2024:
Technology versus history or Science versus archaeology?

K. V. Ramakrishna Rao, IRS (Retd.,) Guest Faculty and Research scholar,
Department of Ancient History and Archaeology, University of Madras, Chepauk, Chennai – 600 005. Cell: 98402 92065; e- mail: kopallerao@yahoo.co.uk

Review of the media reports and research papers on the NIOT Survey conducted at the Gulf of
Khambhat (Cambay) during 2000 2001, 2002 and 2024


The Gulf of Khambhat debate started in 2001 continued in 2024: 
NIOT during its geological studies conducted underwater survey at the Gulf of Khambhat (Cambay) with the underwater instruments found characteristic pattern of systematic arrangement for kms distance. Samples were also collected through instruments and sent for testing. They gave dating to 9500 YBP. When reported that it could be a submerged city with the material objects recovered were dated to 9500 BCE, there was a mixed response. While the researchers with science and technology background appreciated, notably, the media came down heavily criticizing. It even carried the opinion of leading archaeologists to cast aspersion on the objects recovered and the theory proposed. After 23 years, in 2024, the issues were discussed again adding the view of the archaeologist Justin Morris from the British Museum. Therefore, the background and the problems involved are discussed now, as most of the researchers might have forgotten the issue..
2000 – NIOT survey started: The National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), the technical arm of the Department of Ocean Development, Government of India, was carrying out several off-shore surveys for various purposes including pollution monitoring, harbour engineering, pipeline laying, construction of offshore structures, etc. In 2000, during the course of surveys conducted in the Gulf of Cambay, NIOT recognized a series of geometric patterns on the sea bed picked up by side-scan sonar soundings which are very unusual in the marine domain. Repeated surveys of these features clearly picked up a palaeochannel-like feature over 9 km long. In order to substantiate these findings, NIOT carried out detailed sub-bottom profiling in the area. The features occurred at depths of between 20 and 40 m in the Gulf of Cambay about 20 km west of Hazira. There are no known references in the literature to this site2. This discovery was made by analysis of advanced underwater sensors like side-scan sonar, sub-bottom profiler and multi-beam echo sounder. Here the experts presented some aspects of this marine archaeological discovery. The details (published in the paper) are reproduced here for convenience and discussion.


NIOT collected samples: The detailed survey by NIOT revealed that the Gulf of Cambay has an alternating sand and clay formation on the seabed. In order to understand the occurrence of the palaeo-channel in the middle of the Gulf of Cambay, some cores were taken by vibro- and gravity-coring operations. These revealed that in the palaeo-channel area the sea bed surface and a section up to about 0.7 m depth is made up of medium sand with marine shells representing marine-facies. This is followed, at depths of 0.70 to 2.20 m, by a sand and silt formation containing freshwater shells representing alluvial facies (fluvial regime) and archaeological material. At this depth there is a sharp contact with pebbly conglomerate representing fluvial-facies lying below. As one goes deeper, a sharp contact with calcareous sandstones with rhizoliths is found at depths varying from 3 to 4 m. The last one represents buried land surface. Several of the calcareous sandstone samples collected had regular circular or rectangular perforations. A thin section study of these under the petrological microscope shows that well-rounded goethite grains constitute about 25% of the material, with sizes ranging from 80 to 110 microns.

Nature of the earth / stone samples: About an equal percentage of the detrital grains seems to be angular to sub-angular quartz with a size range of 40 to 60 microns. The remaining cementing material is mostly made up of calcite. Apart from this, a few foraminifera, textularids, sponges, echnoid spicules and few ostrocod skeletal remains are found. The rock apparently represents a fluvio-marine environment which subsequently became water-cemented probably due to the lowering of the ground water level in the area. This is evidenced by the formation of root casts and rhizoliths. The calcareous sandstone indicates an ancient land surface on which fluvial and human activities took place. The conglomerate mainly consists of basalt, chalcedony and litho- clasts of calcareous sandstone, and represents a high-energy fluvial system. Similar conglomerates were observed below the early Harappan settlement at Padri on land on the western side of the Gulf of Cambay. Thus, the conglomerates formed at the Khambhat underwater and that of the early Harappan settlement at Padri on land near to Cambay were compared. Thus, the Khambhat is dated prior to Harappan.

Archaeological findings: The side-scan sonar images have picked up rectangular basements like feature on either side of the palaeochannel with a relief of 2 to 3 m from the seabed and vary in size from 5 × 5 m2 to as much as 15 × 15 m2. These features are often covered by sand waves. At places basements of possibly major structures have been picked up. The sub-bottom profiler survey clearly revealed successive layers made up of foundation-like features and cultural strata indicated by acoustic impedance contrast below the basement. The sites identified by side-scan survey were subjected to sampling by a Van-Veen grab sampler4, dredge sampler, and by gravity and vibro corers. Quite a few artefacts of archaeological importance have been recovered from these sites, which are absent outside the area adjoining the palaeochannel. In other words, the recovered samples were reportedly found at the site that was assumed to be the settlement area.

Artefacts found: The artefacts identified included many beads, of which a broken barrel-shaped bead of chert (measuring 13 mm in length and 6 mm in width and with a 4 mm diameter hole, is important. As per A. Gosh5, the tradition of making beads is at least 7000 years old. A chert blade scraper, measuring 76 mm in length, with a width varying from 35 mm to 19 mm and with a thickness of 10 mm, typologically belonging to the upper Paleolithic cultural tradition, was also recovered. Low-fired and grass- embedded pottery pieces were recovered, along with broken hearth material. The piece appears to be made of fine, well levigated clay and is about 3 mm across. The perforated stone piece was examined under an optical image analyzer. The examination revealed, in 100 X magnification, that the holes are irregularly oval in shape and have varying contours. This appears to be connected with deliberate boring activity by a stone tool like a borer, which was quite common in the prehistoric period. In addition, quite a few human bones, as well as a few teeth, have been recovered from the area. These artifacts mentioned were only questioned by the archaeologists reported through the “Frontline.” However, the magazine did not publish any opinion or the response of the NIOT scientists and technical experts.

January 2002 - An underwater urban settlement that pre-dated the Harappan civilisation had been discovered in the Gulf of Khambhat: On January 16, 2002, Union Minister for Human Resource Development, and Science and Technology, Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, who held additional charge of the Department of Ocean Development, made a sensational announcement at a press conference in New Delhi6. He claimed that an underwater urban settlement that pre-dated the Harappan civilisation had been discovered in the Gulf of Khambhat, off the coast of Gujarat7. The spin and interpretation given by Dr. Joshi to the Gulf of Khambhat findings by scientists of the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) generated criticism by, and objections from, Indian and foreign archaeologists, scientists and historians (Frontline, March 15, 2002). Most experts agreed that the claims were made by Dr. Joshi with a view to politicizing the issue and that more exploratory work needed to be undertaken before any meaningful analysis of the findings, leave alone interpretations, could be made. Thus, the media had swung to criticize with such strong words. Particularly, the “Frontline,” known for its Marxist ideology, initiated such bombarding tirade against the discovery. The names of the scientists or historians were not revealed by the “Frontline.”

Experts to be consulted about the dating: the “Frontline” proceeded to assert that “Experts felt that internationally reputed marine archaeologists, scientists and archaeologists working on India and on the Neolithic Age needed to be consulted on the methodology of further exploration, dating and analyses.” Well-known experts on South Asian archaeology, like Richard H. Meadow of Harvard University, even offered to help in such an effort. Experts raised several objections to Dr. Joshi's claim that NIOT had discovered the remains of a 9,500-year-old urban settlement and civilisation.
1.	First, no marine archaeologist has seen the site and no mapping or underwater photography of the site has been undertaken.
2.	Secondly, the dating of the site was attempted on the basis of the age of a piece of wood found there.
3.	Thirdly, there was no conclusive proof that the perforations found in the artefacts were man-made.
4.	And, fourthly, there were deviations from the standard, accepted procedures of archaeology prior to going public with the findings.
This type of arguments can easily be made with the excavated objects also, as they were handled by the excavators, researchers and others at the site, till some of them or the associated sample are sent to laboratories for dating. However, technically, here all questions were answered already in the NIOT reports and the published papers. perhaps, they could not have read them properly or chosen to raise such questions, just to suit the media persons who interviewed them. Here, it has to be noted that only one side view was projected, without contacting the scientists who actually conducted and involved in the scientific surveys with technical instruments.

In 2024 – how the discovery is narrated: Now in October 2024, one Harriet Brewis raised this issue. The vestiges of what many believe to be a lost, ancient civilisation have been discovered off the coast of western India. What has been described as a vast city, stretching more than five miles (8km) long and two miles (3km) wide, was discovered 36 metres (120 feet) underwater in the Gulf of Khambhat (previously known as the Gulf of Cambay)8. The most exciting part of the discovery, which was made by the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) back in December 2000, is that it could rewrite human history as we know it9. However, more

8 Indy.100, Lost underwater 'city' discovered in India could rewrite the history of civilization, Harriet Brewis, Oct 18, 2024.
9	https://www.indy100.com/science-tech/lost-civilization-india-harappan-2669439780	-
:~:text=And%20indeed%2C%20other%20experts%20have,grid%20pattern%2C%E2%80%9D%20he%20 said.
 
ythan two decades since the landmark find, experts are still at loggerheads over the age and significance of the archaeological site, which has come to be known as the Gulf of Khambhat Cultural Complex (GKCC).

Using sonar technology, the team identified huge geometrical structures deep down on the seafloor: So what the archaeologists or historians object to? The city-like structures were uncovered by NIOT by chance, as they performed routine pollution surveys in the region. Using sonar technology, the team identified huge geometrical structures deep down on the seafloor. Debris recovered from the site included pottery, beads, sculptures, sections of walls and human bones and teeth, with carbon dating finding these to be nearly 9,500 years old, BBC News reported at the time10. Announcing the discovery on 19 May 2001, India’s then science and technology minister, Murli Manohar Joshi, said that the ruins belonged to an ancient civilisation11. Dr Joshi said this would have been even older than the Bronze Age Indus Valley civilisation (also known as the Harappan) – the hitherto earliest known urban culture of the Indian subcontinent and one of the world’s three earliest civilisations, along with Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt. In other words, this discovery looked set to have massive repercussions on the view of the ancient world.

NIOT chief geologist clarified: S. Badrinaryanan, who was chief geologist for NIOT’s scientific team at the time, wrote in a piece for Archaeology Online12: “For decades archaeologists have argued about the origins of the mysterious ‘Harappan’ (Indus Valley) civilisation that flourished across what is now Pakistan and northwest India from about 3000 BCE. “Now, [our new findings] suggest that the Harappans were descended from an advanced mother culture that flourished at the end of the last Ice Age that was then submerged by rising sea levels before ‘history’ began.” He went on: “It was generally believed that a well-organized civilization could not have existed prior to 5500 [before the present day]. Many were reluctant to accept that the flood myths mentioned in many ancient religious writings held some grains of truth.” Thus, here, the scientist had taken the criticism also into account.
NIOT geologist gave scientific explanation: However, he insisted, that the discovery made by his colleagues and him “clearly established the existence of an ancient civilisation that was submerged in the sea.” And yet, he said, “conservative archaeologists found it hard to accept” that modern scientific techniques had succeeded in making such a major discovery. “Initially, when the sidescan sonar images of underwater structures were shown, some called it a magic of computer software,” Badrinarayanan recalled. “When hundreds of artefacts were collected and shown, they opined that the ancient river could have transported it!” Stressing the rigour of his

10	BBC, Lost  city  'could  rewrite  history', Saturday, 19 January, 2002, 06:33 GMT; http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/1768109.stm
11	PIB,	Major	Archeological	Discovery	in	Gulf	of	Cambay,	May	19, 2001https://archive.pib.gov.in/archive/releases98/lyr2001/rmay2001/19052001/r190520011.html
12	B.	Badrinarayanan,	Gulf	of	Cambay:	Cradle	of	Ancient	Civilization, https://www.archaeologyonline.net/artifacts/cambay					-
:~:text=The%20artifacts%20collected%20included%20a,human%20remains%20and%20human%20teet h.
 
team’s work, he continued: “Detailed scientific studies were undertaken to prove that the artefacts are in situ. “The criticism has driven us to adopt the most modern technologies and scientific methodologies available in the world, which have completely substantiated our findings, and the results have been published as research papers in reputed international journals.“

2002 - Iravatham Mahadevan, acknowledged that the sonar photos revealed structures that were most likely built by men: And indeed, other experts have validated at least some of the conclusions drawn. Speaking to Frontline in 200213, Indian civil servant and the country’s leading expert on the ancient Indus script, Iravatham Mahadevan, acknowledged that the sonar photos revealed structures that were most likely built by men. So as an expert, he responded carefully understanding the technology behind. “First, there are a series of squares which [Badrinaryanan and his fellow scientists] interpret as a settlement in a grid pattern,” he said. “I am not an archaeologist, much less an underwater archaeologist,” he conceded, but still: “It is very difficult to imagine a series of square plinth areas, with grid-like structures, running for several kilometres, occurring in nature.” And, he continued: “Again, there is a long rectangular structure with something similar to steps leading downward, which is clearly man-made.” And yet, when it comes to many of the artefacts, including precious stones, Mahadevan and others agree that these could have “washed in” from elsewhere. Perhaps the most contentious piece of “evidence” takes the form of a single piece of wood. This wood was carbon dated to an age of 9,500 years – which many experts used to establish the age of the entire site. Thus, it is evident that he had read the NIOT reports and papers, so that he responded with professional decency, academic decorum and scholarly ethics.
March 2002 - Asko Parpola raised questions about the artifacts recovered: And yet, another Indus specialist – Asko Parpola of the University of Helsinki – pointed out that key questions needed to be asked here. In a separate interview with Frontline14, he said:
1.	“First, can the age of the wood found under the sea be correlated to the antiquity of the site?
2.	“Secondly, is this one piece of evidence enough to conclude the antiquity of the site?
3.	“Thirdly, is the underwater site a secure context to gauge the antiquity of the site?” He		then	asked:	“Can	radio	carbon	dating	(that	is	used	in	this	case)	and thermoluminescence (that is to be used for pottery found at the site) give reliable dating for ancient periods?” He then conceded: “I have seen some interesting materials that seem to occur only in this place; not in the surrounding areas. But the problem with this site is that there is very heavy tidal influence and the sands are shifting all the time. “So when we find flat objects here it seems to me perfectly possible that this flattening is done by sand activity - erosion by the sand. “Even the holes that we found in the stones

13 Frontline, 'Be sceptical, and not negative and destructive', Published : Mar 30, 2002 00:00 IST;
https://frontline.thehindu.com/the-nation/article30244518.ece
14 Frontline, The Gulf of Khambat debate, Published : Mar 30, 2002 00:00 IST ; https://frontline.thehindu.com/the-nation/article30244516.ece
 
got from this area may not be due to human drilling. A flat object could have been stuck on a stone and started rolling around because of water activity (currents). So, these holes may have occurred naturally." So he picked up technical glitch to raise such objections to suit the media trial.

2002 - Graham Hancock supported the discovery: And yet, despite the skepticism of the likes of Parpola and Mahadevan, many enthusiasts have jumped on the discovery with great excitement, thus continued Frontline. Controversial film-maker Graham Hancock insisted to BBC News that the evidence was compelling: "The [oceanographers] found that they were dealing with two large blocks of apparently manmade structures,” he said. "Cities on this scale are not known in the archaeological record until roughly 4,500 years ago when the first big cities begin to appear in Mesopotamia.”Nothing else on the scale of the underwater cities of Cambay is known. The first cities of the historical period are as far away from these cities as we are today from the pyramids of Egypt.” This, he stressed, could cause massive disruption to our current historical timelines. "There's a huge chronological problem in this discovery,” he said. “It means that the whole model of the origins of civilisation with which archaeologists have been working will have to be remade from scratch.”

2024 - Archaeologist Justin Morris from the British Museum responded after 23 years: Nevertheless, archaeologist Justin Morris15 from the British Museum said much more work was needed before the site could be categorically classified as belonging to a 9,000-year-old community. "Culturally speaking, in that part of the world there were no civilisations prior to about 2,500 BCE. What's happening before then mainly consisted of small, village settlements," he also told BBC News. Morris also pointed out that the C14 carbon dating process used to establish the age of many of the site’s artefacts is not without its fallibility. Still, 23 years after the discovery was made, a firm conclusion has yet to be reached. This is partly because exploring the site is very difficult owing to its location in highly treacherous waters, with strong currents and rip tides. And yet, Joshi and others have insisted that the truth must be established. "We have to find out what happened then,” he said. “Where and how this civilisation vanished.” But, here in India, who cares for such research is not known.


