Dear sir,
I came across a video in my news feed today, which among other archeological discoveries, mentioned Dwarka - The City of Sri Krishna
While I was aware of the fact that archeological remains had been discovered off the coast of Dwarka and Beyt Dwarka [Efforts date back to 1963] - I did not know that there was some radio-carbon dating evidence too - Specifically - a piece of wood - dated to about 
9000 years ago.



My first thought was that it was time to rewrite history - as taught to us and as practiced by Historians
My second thought  was - why has this not been done so far?

I found the answer to the second question in your article on Research Gate -
Rao, Kopalle. (2025). Khambhat (Cambay) during. 10.13140/RG.2.2.25706.22723.
 - Politics in the field of science - Its is An Inconvenient truth - from the point of view of Historians -  both Western and Indian - and both with vested interests.

Quoting from your article

"January 2002 - An underwater urban settlement that pre-dated the Harappan civilisation had been discovered in the Gulf of Khambhat: On January 16, 2002, Union Minister for Human Resource Development, and Science and Technology, Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi, who held additional charge of the Department of Ocean Development, made a sensational announcement at a press conference in New Delhi6. He claimed that an underwater urban settlement that pre-dated the Harappan civilisation had been discovered in the Gulf of Khambhat, off the coast of Gujarat. The spin and interpretation given by Dr. Joshi to the Gulf of Khambhat findings by scientists of the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) generated criticism by, and objections from, Indian and foreign archaeologists, scientists and historians (Frontline, March 15, 2002). Most experts agreed that the claims were made by Dr. Joshi with a view to politicizing the issue and that more exploratory work needed to be undertaken before any meaningful analysis of the findings, leave alone interpretations, could be made. Thus, the media had swung to criticize with such strong words. Particularly, the “Frontline,” known for its Marxist ideology, initiated such bombarding tirade against the discovery. The names of the scientists or historians were not revealed by the 'Frontline.'

The Nature of the Evidence Recovered
Debris recovered from the site included pottery, beads, sculptures, sections of walls and human bones and teeth, with carbon dating finding these to be nearly 9,500 years old, 


That brings me to the third question:

Quoting Graham Hancock: 
"There's a huge chronological problem in this discovery,” he said. “It means that the whole model of the origins of civilisation with which archaeologists have been working will have to be remade from scratch.”

On a matter concerning civilizational history - and one which would have forced the whole model of origins of civilization - Why did Dr. Joshi, and the NIOT Team - seek formal assistance from the ASI to establish
the veracity of the claim
 

468490


I tried multiple search tools [ Including Semantic Scholar,  elicit, and others], but could not find any articles claiming this - However, there are articles in mainstream media, and online discussion forums like Quora and Redditt - which address this claim.

The only peer-reviewed article  [K Vora, A. S. Gaur, Sundaresh, 2002]  I found which refers to Dwarka - does not mention Radio-Carbon Dating - It uses Thermoluminescence dating


Santosh Iyer ,  26th August 2024 - The Sacred Enigma of the Lost Celestial City of Dwarka] - 
mentions an archeological discovery in the Gulf of Cambay [2001] - an accidental finding during a survey commissioned by the Government of India to assess pollution levels.  An ancient city spanning five square miles was found - and quoting from that article

"The exploration team, assisted by divers, retrieved various intriguing artifacts including stone blocks, copper coins, and other samples, all hinting at a civilization long lost to time.
Initial analysis suggested these relics were around 3,600 years old, a significant find in itself. However, further carbon dating conducted by institutions in Manipur and Oxford University unveiled even more astonishing results. Some artifacts dated back as far as 9,000 years, suggesting the presence of an ancient civilization around 7500 BC."


"Among these fascinating finds were a piece of wood, pottery sherds, weathered stones potentially used as tools, fossilized bones, and a tooth. These items were analyzed by several esteemed institutions, including the National Geophysical Research Institute in Hyderabad, the Birbal Sahni Institute of Paleobotany in Lucknow, and the Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad. Remarkably, the piece of wood was carbon-dated to be 9,500 years old."

"The National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) returned for further exploration between October 2002 and January 2003, examining two paleochannels bordered by rectangular and square structures resembling basements. Through dredging, they recovered more artifacts, including pottery sherds, microliths, remnants of wattle and daub, and hearth materials. Subsequent dating conducted at laboratories in Manipur University and Oxford University confirmed these artifacts to be 9,000 years old."



https://www.archaeologyonline.net/artifacts/cambay
